---
layout: post
title: RDiscount 2.1.6 released
tags: [Software]

---

There are several new features in [RDiscount] 2.1.6. My favorite is fenced code blocks.

Update to the latest version with:

```
gem update rdiscount
```

RDiscount now has feature parity with the latest Discount release.

[RDiscount]: /projects/rdiscount/

## What's New?

* Fenced code blocks
    * [backtick-delimited] - from *GitHub Flavored Markdown*
    * [tilde-delimited] - from *PHP Markdown Extra*
* New extensions:
    * `:no_superscript` - Disables superscript processing.
    * `:no_strikethrough` - Disables strikethrough processing.
* License changed from 4-clause BSD to the more-permissive 3-clause BSD.
* Fix `--` and `---` to be converted to `&ndash;` and `&mdash;` correctly.
* Fix handling of tables that have leading and trailing pipe characters.
* Fix generated table of contents to be valid HTML.  
  Handling of special characters in headings is also improved.
* Fix recognition of HTML tags that contain `-` or `_`.

[backtick-delimited]: http://github.github.com/github-flavored-markdown/
[tilde-delimited]: http://michelf.ca/projects/php-markdown/extra/#fenced-code-blocks

## What's Next?

Only David Loren Parsons knows.[^discount-maintainer] :-)

### *Related Articles*

* [RDiscount 2.0.7 released](/articles/2013/02/02/rdiscount-2.0.7-released/)
    * *Release notes for the previous release of RDiscount.*
* [Why I no longer use Drupal](/articles/2012/12/16/why-i-no-longer-use-drupal/)
    * *Why Jekyll (and not Drupal) is awesome for making a personal website or blog.*
    * *Jekyll can use RDiscount for Markdown rendering.*

[^discount-maintainer]: David Loren Parsons is the author and maintainer of the Discount library underlying RDiscount.